Apropos, but not very not very information.
NOTE CONF
First and second is Glasgow, which are guitar.
Guitar.
NOTE CONF
Do you know what that means?
Howling.
NOTE CONF
Abyss.
Fair enough.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The red light is on.
So let's let's start the lecture.
NOTE CONF
So I'm just going to leave that up for a
minute or two.
NOTE CONF
A couple of things I want to say.
So first of all there's been this lack of clarity
NOTE CONF
around labs.
So for reasons I don't completely understand, you've all been
NOTE CONF
allocated a specific lab in your timetable.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is not reflective of reality.
In reality, there are five labs that all drop in.
NOTE CONF
You never need to go to any lab.
You can go to any as many as you like.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And I would strongly recommend you do sometimes go to
NOTE CONF
labs.
As I said on Monday, it's a really great place
NOTE CONF
to get support, but you've been allocated a specific one
and you can just ignore that.
NOTE CONF
Go to any of them.
We will and I'll send an email about this.
NOTE CONF
We will actually have to be starting the Monday lunchtime,
one a little later.
NOTE CONF
That's scheduled for 310.
We're having to put it back to 330, because there's
NOTE CONF
been some big mess up in another course, and they
don't have the proper rooms allocated, so they've had to
NOTE CONF
ask for 20 minutes of our session.
It's a two hour session, so this shouldn't really impact
NOTE CONF
anyone.
But if you go at 110, be aware there will
NOTE CONF
be another class in there until 130.
Um, tutorials and labs are not assessed.
NOTE CONF
All the lab exercises are for your own practice.
Right.
NOTE CONF
We're not going to be looking at them.
You can go through them with a demonstrator in a
NOTE CONF
lab session if you want feedback on them, but they're
not assessed if you don't do them.
NOTE CONF
There's no direct drawback of that.
There's a lot of indirect drawbacks because this is really
NOTE CONF
important part of how you're going to develop your Java
skills, which is really necessary for later years.
NOTE CONF
But it's not it's not going to impact your grades.
Actually.
NOTE CONF
It will impact your grade indirectly because you won't be
you won't find the assessment as easy, but it's not
NOTE CONF
directly assessed.
Tutorials.
NOTE CONF
Different matter.
I don't know whether the allocation has been done yet.
NOTE CONF
I know all the details are with timetabling.
They might not be in your time.
NOTE CONF
I don't think they're in your timetables yet.
They start in week three.
NOTE CONF
Those are compulsory.
They're not assessed, but they're compulsory.
NOTE CONF
And you must.
You will be assigned a specific tutorial, which should be
NOTE CONF
mostly with other people in your academic family.
You must go to that tutorial.
NOTE CONF
If you can't go to that tutorial, then timetable will
let you know how to ask for a different slot.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So difference between labs and tutorials.
NOTE CONF
All right.
If anyone's unclear.
NOTE CONF
Keep posting on Piazza.
I hope Piazza is going well so far.
NOTE CONF
So we've got almost completely new team in it from
B.
NOTE CONF
I'm the only person who's continuing.
So the people who are covering it are just kind
NOTE CONF
of picking it up.
They're not used to it.
NOTE CONF
So maybe some things are slipping through the gaps.
If you feel like the responses are not quick enough
NOTE CONF
on Piazza or anything, let me know.
We we are intentionally, not immediately answering questions to help
NOTE CONF
that student dialogue, but they should be answered fairly promptly.
Um, also, ah, there have been two screw ups with
NOTE CONF
times for assessments on different parts of the web page.
I'm really sorry about this.
NOTE CONF
This is not really okay.
K um, there's so many moving parts in this course
NOTE CONF
and so many different places we need to put this
information.
NOTE CONF
So there was originally an error in the course time
player on learn about the about the dates, submission dates
NOTE CONF
of the later quizzes.
Not the current quizzes but the ones later in the
NOTE CONF
semester.
And there was also an error on the schedule where
NOTE CONF
the information about assignment 2.1 was in the correct week,
but the dates associated from it were incorrect because they've
NOTE CONF
been copied over from last year, and I hadn't noticed
that that hadn't been updated.
NOTE CONF
That's all updated now.
Pretty sure there's no more errors.
NOTE CONF
I'm really sorry about that.
That really shouldn't happen.
NOTE CONF
Thank you very much to the people who noticed that
and let me know.
NOTE CONF
So the thing I'm most do not want is people
complaining about stuff but not telling me, right?
NOTE CONF
If there's things that are wrong or things you don't
like, you need to tell me and I can hopefully
NOTE CONF
do something about it, especially if something's wrong.
I need to do something about it.
NOTE CONF
So please just put a put a, put a post
on Piazza, come to my office or email me, talk
NOTE CONF
to me at the end of the lecture or whatever.
But just let the team know and we can make
NOTE CONF
changes, Okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So now I have to keep a much better eye
on time.
NOTE CONF
So last, last Monday, very unlike me, I completely lost
track of time.
NOTE CONF
And that meant we didn't have time for any Q&A.
So sorry about that, but we will time it better
NOTE CONF
today.
Let me just get my phone out so I can
NOTE CONF
keep an eye on the time.
It's always in front of me.
NOTE CONF
That'd be much easier.
Okay, good.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so let's go on to the next slide.
Our head of the lecture.
NOTE CONF
So this is Stevie.
Stevie's named after Stevie Nicks.
NOTE CONF
How many people here know who Stevie Nicks is?
Whoa.
NOTE CONF
Not that many.
Well, maybe I don't know.
NOTE CONF
People have quite low hands up.
So Stevie Nicks, she's awesome.
NOTE CONF
She was a singer songwriter.
She did a lot of work with Fleetwood Mac, but
NOTE CONF
also a lot of solo stuff, mostly in the 70s.
But she was really seminal and really important for women
NOTE CONF
in music and did some great stuff.
So Stevie, the cat named after her, that's super cool.
NOTE CONF
I've already got quite a lot of pictures of pets.
That's great.
NOTE CONF
What I'm going to do for now is just go
through one per lecture.
NOTE CONF
Everybody who sends me a picture will get it in
the lecture.
NOTE CONF
I don't want to flood them all at once because
then I might run out.
NOTE CONF
But if I keep getting more in, then I will
maybe put up more than one per lecture.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Burnside.
NOTE CONF
Kaylee.
Do you guys know that there's a Burnside Kaylee.
NOTE CONF
Next Friday?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There is.
There's posters up around it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Who has been to Kaylee?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We had a Kaylee the first semester.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Well, Kaylee's are, I think, really fun.
NOTE CONF
Particularly if you like dancing.
It's traditional Scottish dancing.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to know anything.
It'll all be set up for people who have not
NOTE CONF
done Kaitlyn before.
Here is the QR code.
NOTE CONF
I'll leave that up for a second.
Um, there's a limit on numbers about.
NOTE CONF
I think it's 100 max.
You have to pay for the ticket.
NOTE CONF
£5.
You get lots of food and drink for that.
NOTE CONF
The main reason that we are charging, I mean, it's
partly to cover all the food and drink, but also
NOTE CONF
because what happens at the Helper's, Kaylee, is that we
sell, sell tickets really quickly.
NOTE CONF
But attendance was quite low, so a lot of people
really wanted to come.
NOTE CONF
Couldn't get tickets and then people with tickets didn't come.
So if people have small amounts of payment, encourage you
NOTE CONF
to come.
So if you do get a ticket, please do.
NOTE CONF
Um, please do actually come.
Or if you can't come, let us know.
NOTE CONF
We might be able to resell it.
Please don't get a ticket and then not come unless
NOTE CONF
obviously sometimes totally unexpected things pop up, but it's just
a waste.
NOTE CONF
It's a shame for people who can't get tickets anyway.
I'll be there.
NOTE CONF
It's going to be lots of fun.
Right.
NOTE CONF
My office, our.
I will send this round on email, and I will
NOTE CONF
also put it up on the open course page.
And I will remind you on Mondays lecture.
NOTE CONF
But it's going to be 4:00 on Mondays in 606
in Appleton Tower.
NOTE CONF
This was the most popular slot.
If you can't make it, I'm really sorry, but come
NOTE CONF
to me any lecture or drop me an email, that's
totally fine.
NOTE CONF
But if you can come try and focus questions during
office hours, because that's just much easier.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to bring out biscuits.
I don't actually know exactly what kind of business I'm
NOTE CONF
going to get, but they're going to be somehow OAP
biscuits.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Oh, this I should I don't know why this is
NOTE CONF
all shoved up on one side.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What I realised I should have talked about in the
first lecture and I didn't.
NOTE CONF
Is Gen I and I'm from B, so this was
beginning to be obviously a real issue last year.
NOTE CONF
It hasn't previously been an issue in the same way
that it is now.
NOTE CONF
So as you know, Jen, I is very good at
doing a lot of the stuff that we're doing, whether
NOTE CONF
that's I mean, ChatGPT is quite good at this sort
of stuff, co-pilot etc..
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And of course, as you go into your careers, whatever
NOTE CONF
career you have, using AI is going to be really,
really important.
NOTE CONF
And some things you're going to be focusing on later
on in your degree is going to be looking at
NOTE CONF
how you use AI as a code effectively, right.
And maybe if you go into coding, a lot of
NOTE CONF
what you're going to be doing in coding is prompt
engineering, rather than doing the coding from scratch yourself as
NOTE CONF
you would traditionally have done.
This is really important.
NOTE CONF
However, this is not what we're learning in from B,
right?
NOTE CONF
So even though there's fantastic tools to help you with
coding, even though you could get AI to do most
NOTE CONF
of this course for you, if you ever want to
get into be a good coder, you have to understand
NOTE CONF
the stuff yourself, right?
You can't just get.
NOTE CONF
I see it completely and never think about it.
If you do prompt engineering later, you get all these
NOTE CONF
much more complex results back.
You need to be able to analyse it, you need
NOTE CONF
to be able to understand it.
And that is why we continue to teach these basic
NOTE CONF
skills without AI, even though I could do it because
you have to develop these skills.
NOTE CONF
It's kind of like, you know, even though we have
calculators, we still teach arithmetic to kids, because actually that
NOTE CONF
ability to do things in your head is an important
part of cognitive development.
NOTE CONF
So you are not allowed to use JNI in the
assessments that we give you.
NOTE CONF
I have to double check if there's any exceptions to
that with the people who are.
NOTE CONF
If there's any exceptions in the assessment, they'll let you
know.
NOTE CONF
But in general, this has got to be your own
work.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now there's a move to do.
NOTE CONF
Go away completely from coursework and do everything in exam
conditions, because then it means that you can't use JNI.
NOTE CONF
And we haven't done this in this course yet, partly
because it actually takes ages.
NOTE CONF
By the way, the seats down at the front, if
you want to sit down, there's quite a few over
NOTE CONF
here.
And if you're right on the end, can you can
NOTE CONF
you maybe move up a bit?
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
And leave those open.
So, uh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we're not doing that partly because it takes I
mean, it takes such a long time to get these
NOTE CONF
things through Board of Studies, but also because I think
sitting in an exam doing coding is not really a
NOTE CONF
good way to assess coding.
So I have to admit that our ability to detect
NOTE CONF
you using this as not as high as we would
like.
NOTE CONF
So there's a bit of an element of honour around
this.
NOTE CONF
Um, but all I would say, I mean, I know
that it's really tempting to to I mean, this is
NOTE CONF
cheating using DNA.
It's really tempting.
NOTE CONF
You get really stressed, the deadlines coming up.
It's just you can get away with it to some
NOTE CONF
extent.
Maybe not necessarily, but it's.
NOTE CONF
I can't emphasise enough that what you're doing in this
course is laying the foundations for your degree.
NOTE CONF
And if you do that by just getting ChatGPT to
do it and not learning it yourself or whatever it
NOTE CONF
might be you're using, this is really going to come
back to bite you in later years.
NOTE CONF
So please take this seriously.
You have to develop these skills and if you just
NOTE CONF
don't do this.
It's going to be a problem.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
All right.
NOTE CONF
No, that's for later in the lecture.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So we did awkwardly stop right in the middle last
time I was not expecting to get to the end
NOTE CONF
of all of the contents of the first lecture, because
we have to do all the admin stuff, but I
NOTE CONF
wasn't really intending to stop in the middle of a
sentence.
NOTE CONF
But anyway, we're now what we're going to do.
What's the time?
NOTE CONF
20 pass okay, that gives us plenty of time.
We're going to finish the first lecture, and then we're
NOTE CONF
going to move on to loops that we're doing that
we're planning to do in the second lecture.
NOTE CONF
So if you remember what we got to I think
this is where we got to, we were looking at
NOTE CONF
string concatenation.
So we're looking at how you can use the plus
NOTE CONF
sign to do integer addition.
But also if you if you use a plus sign
NOTE CONF
and you're passing in strings, it's going to interpret the
plus sign as string concatenation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what happens if we mix this up a little
NOTE CONF
bit.
Let's say uh is that you double O.
NOTE CONF
And then we're going to put in an integer here.
So we've got an integer between two strings.
NOTE CONF
So this string here and this string is telling this
plus symbol that telling Java Plus should be interpreted interpreted
NOTE CONF
as string concatenation.
But here we have an integer which is saying you
NOTE CONF
have to interpret this as integer addition.
So what is IntelliJ.
NOTE CONF
What's Java going to do with this.
So if we run it we see that that works
NOTE CONF
fine.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what is happening here is that Java is recognising
this as an integer, but is trying to do something
NOTE CONF
that's incompatible.
Right.
NOTE CONF
You can't you can't have plus being both integer addition
and string concatenation.
NOTE CONF
So what will Java will do in certain kind of
specific situations.
NOTE CONF
It'll try to be helpful by seeing what is possible.
Now it's always possible to turn pretty much anything into
NOTE CONF
a string just by putting quotation marks around it.
At least that's what it looks like to us.
NOTE CONF
It's not what's happening under the hood, but you can
turn things into strings.
NOTE CONF
You can't obviously turn strings into integers.
So it's just turning this into a string and then
NOTE CONF
doing string concatenation.
But by the way, what would happen if we took
NOTE CONF
these zeros out and put them in here?
What's going to happen here?
NOTE CONF
So if we run that, we see the two zeros
are dropped, right?
NOTE CONF
And this is because Java's first looking in this as
an integer and 007 as an integer is the same
NOTE CONF
as seven is most easily expressed as seven.
And that's why it's returning it.
NOTE CONF
So it's dealing with an integer and then turning it
into a string.
NOTE CONF
Whereas if you put this in a string, obviously Java's
not looking inside the string to see what that means.
NOTE CONF
It's just treating it as a whole thing.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's move on to variables.
NOTE CONF
Let me just get the oh sorry.
Let me I should not be up.
NOTE CONF
Get rid of that.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, what can I do?
Let me do a full screen mode.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Okay, so now we're going to look at the basic
NOTE CONF
definitions.
The structure of Java code.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we're going to go back to look at numbers.
NOTE CONF
And this time we're going to be printing out.
So we're going to.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what we've all we've been looking at so far
NOTE CONF
is just print statements.
It's not doing anything other than printing stuff out.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In fact I think that's what we got to.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now we're going to look at variables.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to have an integer variable.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's think of an integer value for this.
What value should we give a three.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And we're going to have b.
NOTE CONF
What value are we going to be 17.
Awesome.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Right.
NOTE CONF
We didn't do this on Monday did we.
No no.
NOTE CONF
Okay good.
Just make sure.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Then what we're going to print out here is a
NOTE CONF
plus B right.
So the print statement is now taking in data that's
NOTE CONF
coming further higher up in the program and doing something
with it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you can see there's this red appearing.
NOTE CONF
What happens if you have red.
We'll try and run it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's not going to run.
NOTE CONF
If you have red in your program, you can't run
it.
NOTE CONF
And here you can see the name of the file
is underlined in red.
NOTE CONF
That means something really bad is wrong.
We can't run it.
NOTE CONF
So what?
What is the problem?
NOTE CONF
So IntelliJ has lots of really useful ways of finding
out what's going on.
NOTE CONF
So wherever there's a problem, there's a little bar next
to it on the right hand side of the screen.
NOTE CONF
And you can hover over that and it'll tell you.
So this is saying cannot resolve symbol A.
NOTE CONF
This is also what it's saying down here when I
try and run it.
NOTE CONF
And if I look up here I've got lots of
problems.
NOTE CONF
And again if I click on that it'll show me
what these are.
NOTE CONF
So the problem is that it can't resolve the symbol.
Right.
NOTE CONF
What that means is that Java is saying I don't
know what A is, what is a right.
NOTE CONF
So in some languages.
So we can see here we've told that A is
NOTE CONF
equal to three.
Now some languages would say well three is an integer.
NOTE CONF
And I'm saying that a is equal to three.
So a must be an integer.
NOTE CONF
That's fine.
You don't need to tell it.
NOTE CONF
It's just going to assume it.
Java does not do that.
NOTE CONF
Java likes everything to be very neat and very clear
and very explicit and it will force you to tell
NOTE CONF
it right.
So I have to tell Java before I introduce a
NOTE CONF
I have to say before I try and give a
value to it, I have to say what what a
NOTE CONF
is.
So I just put a B here.
NOTE CONF
And what this is saying is I'm introducing two variables
and their names and their they're called a and b
NOTE CONF
and they're both integers.
That's their type.
NOTE CONF
They're both of type integer.
And now I'm going to assign a value to it.
NOTE CONF
So say if I wanted to assign it like the
string three, it's not going to like this because it
NOTE CONF
was like well you have told me that a is
an integer and now you're giving it a value of
NOTE CONF
a string.
That's not that's not possible.
NOTE CONF
Integers kind of values that are strings.
So Java really cares about this.
NOTE CONF
Um, so there's kind of mixed views about whether this
is a good thing.
NOTE CONF
It's kind of easier when you don't have to do
this explicit declaration, and you can just make assumptions based
NOTE CONF
on what you assign things.
But doing this all explicitly, it keeps you right.
NOTE CONF
It makes it more difficult to it's more difficult to
make mistakes, and it's easier to understand things when you
NOTE CONF
come and look at it later on.
So there's pros and cons to doing it.
NOTE CONF
But in Java you have to do it.
There's two different ways of declaring things.
NOTE CONF
You can declare them right at the beginning or at
any point before you use them on a separate line.
NOTE CONF
Or you can do what we call we can.
You can declare it as you introduce it, and you
NOTE CONF
can do this all on the same line.
And we're saying, here's a and it's got this value.
NOTE CONF
And oh, by the way it's an integer.
So you can do either way.
NOTE CONF
That's fine.
And then if we run that it's going to do
NOTE CONF
the addition for us.
Um okay.
NOTE CONF
So just a bit of oh.
And we all also can say instead of doing a
NOTE CONF
plus B in the print statement, which is kind of
always fixing us to, that's going to be the one
NOTE CONF
we're looking at.
We can have C in here, another variable.
NOTE CONF
And we can say C is a plus B.
And usually usually you don't want to do too much
NOTE CONF
in print statements because it makes it more difficult to
follow.
NOTE CONF
It's usually useful to do it here.
And again we have to initialise a c.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to say that's also an integer okay.
So this is an assignment statement here, where you're declaring
NOTE CONF
a variable and you're assigning a value to it.
That's an assignment statement.
NOTE CONF
These here 17 and three are what we call literals.
And that means they're specific values that you're assigning to
NOTE CONF
variables.
And these things are variables which means as you probably
NOTE CONF
all know they can take on different values.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So.
NOTE CONF
And here is all this in slides.
So you know that okay.
NOTE CONF
And then there's other ways we can.
So we had a look at Hello World where we
NOTE CONF
were doing it in the print statement.
But equally we can just say we're going to print
NOTE CONF
out a message.
And here we're going to say message is hello world
NOTE CONF
okay.
And again it's not happy because I haven't told it.
NOTE CONF
The type of message.
What's the type of message string okay.
NOTE CONF
So string is capitalised.
Integer is not capitalised.
NOTE CONF
We'll get on in a little while to why that
is.
NOTE CONF
For now don't worry about it.
And this is an advantage because then we can print
NOTE CONF
out whatever we like right.
So we can send in different values.
NOTE CONF
different values for message, and it'll print it out.
Whereas if we just say hello, world, that's all that's
NOTE CONF
ever going to do.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So built in data types very important in Java.
So there's quite a lot of them.
NOTE CONF
These are the ones you'll be using most often.
So characters are individual letters or symbols.
NOTE CONF
Individual symbols I guess which can be letters.
They can be blank space can be dollar signs and
NOTE CONF
that sort of stuff.
These are done in Java with single quotation marks.
NOTE CONF
Strings are sequences of characters and they're done with double
quotation marks.
NOTE CONF
Integers.
You know, integers are whole numbers.
NOTE CONF
Um, then floating point numbers are their type is double.
This is kind of I always find this quite annoying.
NOTE CONF
This is a hangover from the old days.
So the basic, uh, the so double has you can
NOTE CONF
have bigger numbers than double, and the basic one is
float.
NOTE CONF
And it used to be back in the day, um,
memory was a real issue.
NOTE CONF
You really don't want to use up a lot of
memory because machines don't have a lot of memory.
NOTE CONF
So you would only use float.
And then if you had a really big if you
NOTE CONF
really needed to, you'd use double.
And that means it's got double the storage space.
NOTE CONF
So you can get a double as much data into
a double as you can in float.
NOTE CONF
Nowadays, no one cares about memory at that level because
we've got way more memory.
NOTE CONF
So nobody ever uses float.
You just use double.
NOTE CONF
But if you're wondering why is it called double?
That's what it means.
NOTE CONF
So it's just decimal numbers.
Boolean is also something you'll use a lot, which is
NOTE CONF
truth values whether something is true or not okay.
So integer operations.
NOTE CONF
So we've had a look at plus but everything else
works in a way you'd expect minus multiplication division.
NOTE CONF
So we looked at integers division.
There's no fractional part in integer integer division because it's
NOTE CONF
only dealing with integers.
Integers can't have parts.
NOTE CONF
But if you're doing it with doubles of course doubles
have decimal parts.
NOTE CONF
And so it is.
You get the exact response rather than rounded up to
NOTE CONF
the nearest whole number.
The remainder.
NOTE CONF
We didn't look at that.
Let's have a look at that.
NOTE CONF
So we did.
Let's see.
NOTE CONF
What do we do.
Let's say int a equals five.
NOTE CONF
Int b equals two.
In c equals a divided by b.
NOTE CONF
Spaces in something that looks nice.
And we're going to print out c.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that gives us two because five divided by two
NOTE CONF
is 2.5.
And the integer part of that is two.
NOTE CONF
And then this is the remainder operation.
And a five remainder two is one.
NOTE CONF
If you remember your math that's because if you divide
it, if you keep dividing by two essentially two times
NOTE CONF
two is four.
And then there's there's one remainder between 5 and 4.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Hopefully that makes sense.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what happens?
Let's have a look if we change this.
NOTE CONF
So we've said this is so we haven't told it.
It's institute division.
NOTE CONF
It's interpreting it as integer division because all of the
components are integers.
NOTE CONF
So what happens if we make this instead of an
integer.
NOTE CONF
Let's make it a double okay.
So first of all it's not going to like that
NOTE CONF
because I've told it that a is an integer.
And then I'm assigning a value that's not an integer.
NOTE CONF
So I have to change the type of a double
okay.
NOTE CONF
Now it doesn't like this line because I'm saying c
is an integer.
NOTE CONF
Um, but I'm doing I'm not doing integer division here
because I've got a double coming in.
NOTE CONF
So that doesn't make sense either.
So I can change this to double.
NOTE CONF
And then when I do this division it'll tell me
2.5.
NOTE CONF
So even though B is still an integer A it's
got some of the data coming in is A is
NOTE CONF
a double.
So it will do double division.
NOTE CONF
So the one of the principles in Java is that
it does not want to throw away data.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So it does.
NOTE CONF
It never wants to convert a double into an integer
because you're losing data there.
NOTE CONF
Whereas if you convert an integer into a double, that's
okay.
NOTE CONF
You're not losing any data.
You're not using any information.
NOTE CONF
So it can just convert 2 to 2.0 and then
do double division.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Oh yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's a good question.
NOTE CONF
So if this is an integer and I just put
this in here, but I've told it that C is
NOTE CONF
a double.
What's it going to do.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a look.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is kind of interesting.
Actually what it does is it does.
NOTE CONF
It's being told here this is integer division because it's
not looking at C when it's doing the division it
NOTE CONF
evaluates on the right first.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So it's got two integers coming in.
It's doing integer division and the outcome is two.
NOTE CONF
But now I'm saying okay but C is actually a
double.
NOTE CONF
So it has to convert to an integer into a
double.
NOTE CONF
And that is 2.0.
So information is being lost there.
NOTE CONF
Well it's not being lost because these are both integers.
But yeah that's what happens.
NOTE CONF
It does.
this evaluates this first and then it converts it to
NOTE CONF
a double.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Now, there are ways around here around this.
So say we're going to go back to this being
NOTE CONF
a double and we're going to make this an integer.
And it's really not happy about this.
NOTE CONF
Now generally if it's if it's complaining about stuff generally
it has good principles.
NOTE CONF
And if you're getting this you're like oh yeah, okay,
I am losing data.
NOTE CONF
Thanks very much, Java.
I'm going to change that.
NOTE CONF
But sometimes there are there is a reason why you
really want this to be an integer, maybe, or for
NOTE CONF
whatever reason, you want to force it to be something
that isn't.
NOTE CONF
Naturally, you're allowed to do this.
This is called casting.
NOTE CONF
So what you do here is you say, right, here's
this division, whatever it is, and I want this to
NOTE CONF
be an integer.
I want an integer output for this.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So it's essentially saying do this division however you like
NOTE CONF
and then make this into an integer.
And then I can assign it to something that is
NOTE CONF
an integer.
This is called casting.
NOTE CONF
And if we do this it's going to give us
an integer value.
NOTE CONF
It's going to give us two.
Even though A is a double it's throwing away that
NOTE CONF
data because I'm explicitly telling it that that's what I
wanted to do.
NOTE CONF
You won't come across as all this often, all that
often, but it is something that does come up.
NOTE CONF
So you need to know what this is about.
You have it on the right hand side to say
NOTE CONF
to do the casting before you do the assignment.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've done the remainder to go back to all
these integer operations.
NOTE CONF
Of course, if you divide by zero that's a runtime
error because it's not possible to divide by zero.
NOTE CONF
So how you organise these things are there is the
precedence that Java uses is just the same as the
NOTE CONF
normal mathematical way you do preference.
However, I would strongly recommend against working out precedents and
NOTE CONF
doing it that way.
Put things in brackets.
NOTE CONF
If you want things to happen first, put them in
brackets.
NOTE CONF
Whether or not it would do that automatically.
Because if you use brackets to clearly show which bits
NOTE CONF
go together.
It's so much easier to read.
NOTE CONF
It's much easier to know what you're intending to do,
but it will work without using brackets if you get
NOTE CONF
the precedent right.
So what I would do here is I would put
NOTE CONF
three times five in brackets and then minus two to
show you do the three times first first, three times
NOTE CONF
five first and then you minus two.
It knows that anyway because that's that's bonus.
NOTE CONF
But it's just so much easier to read.
And you don't have to be thinking about this when
NOTE CONF
you're trying to interpret it.
Oh yeah.
NOTE CONF
We've got some practice, some examples here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The double I've mentioned that here are some expressions.
Yeah I don't think we need to go through those
NOTE CONF
right now.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we talked a little bit about converting.
This happens automatically if you're not losing precision.
NOTE CONF
Or it can always convert anything into a string.
And you can explicitly cast it if you want it
NOTE CONF
to be something that is naturally not.
So here we're rounding.
NOTE CONF
So this is an example of If we want to
round a decimal number to an integer and we can
NOTE CONF
cast that to an int.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if you want uh, right.
So if you want a floating point result from the
NOTE CONF
division, you have to make at least one of the
operands a double.
NOTE CONF
And it will happen anyway.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So let's just practice a little bit of that.
Whereas we've gone this is we can just think about
NOTE CONF
this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here are some kind of arithmetic operators.
Which of these is going to have an output type
NOTE CONF
of double.
And you should be able to vote for multiple.
NOTE CONF
Also.
Whew.
NOTE CONF
As far as I can tell, does not have a
setting where you can hide people's results until a lot
NOTE CONF
of people have tried it, which means you can see
what everyone else is doing, which tends to massively bias
NOTE CONF
in favour of what most people want.
And then you want to be able Okay.
NOTE CONF
Maybe you can come up afterwards and show me how
to do that.
NOTE CONF
I used to do it on mentally tone.
It's much easier.
NOTE CONF
I don't really like Root Club, but yeah, if somebody
knows how to do that, let me know because it's
NOTE CONF
much easier these things.
Okay, this is coming out pretty clearly.
NOTE CONF
Um, is five divided by two is a is this
number one, is this a double?
NOTE CONF
No, it's not because it's two integers coming in.
So it's going to be an integer coming out.
NOTE CONF
Uh what about number two.
The same thing.
NOTE CONF
Two instances going in instead of coming out.
But we're then casting it to a double.
NOTE CONF
So correct.
That will be a double uh, five divided by 2.0.
NOTE CONF
One of the things coming in is a double.
So it's going to have a double coming out.
NOTE CONF
And here we've got the remainder.
These are both integers.
NOTE CONF
So this is an integer operation.
And also it doesn't really make any sense for a
NOTE CONF
remainder to have a two to be a double.
Uh okay.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what is the output.
NOTE CONF
This is C we've got the character C and we're
multiplying it by ten.
NOTE CONF
What is the outcome of that going to be.
Okay, so most people, almost everyone is saying for type
NOTE CONF
mismatch error, okay, that is not the correct answer.
That is definitely the the one you should guess.
NOTE CONF
If you don't know what's going on here.
This is completely non-intuitive.
NOTE CONF
But just to show you what's happening here, let's try
this out.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's just do it in the print statement.
So we're going to do C character times ten okay.
NOTE CONF
And what is that going to provide.
It's going to provide.
NOTE CONF
So the answer to C times ten is 990 okay.
Does anyone have any idea what's going on there.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And it's multiplying that.
NOTE CONF
Exactly.
So this is about Ascii which I actually had up
NOTE CONF
in the last lecture and I don't have up now.
So ask you for those of you who don't know,
NOTE CONF
this is basically a way of assigning.
So every character has a numerical Miracle value.
NOTE CONF
So here you can see it's lowercase.
See this.
NOTE CONF
This value in Ascii is 99.
So what Java is doing here is it's saying oh
NOTE CONF
I know that all characters.
There is a way to convert those into integers.
NOTE CONF
So I'm just going to be helpful.
I see that this is possible with that conversion.
NOTE CONF
So it's converting this into an integer and then multiplying
it by another integer.
NOTE CONF
So the outcome is actually going to be an integer.
That's a bit.
NOTE CONF
That's actually something quite useful that you're going to use
later on.
NOTE CONF
But if you don't already know that you would never
guess that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's see.
NOTE CONF
000 okay.
Right on the left.
NOTE CONF
Wait.
So up to the to the to.
NOTE CONF
To this way.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
No.
What?
NOTE CONF
Go to this.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Now go down.
Down that way.
NOTE CONF
Oh, okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Thanks.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
I'm really bad with the left and right.
NOTE CONF
Especially when it's on the screen.
I'm facing it the other way.
NOTE CONF
I'm just teaching my daughter to drive right now, and
it's such a night because I keep saying, okay, turn
NOTE CONF
left here, and then she's going.
I'm like, no, no, this way, this way.
NOTE CONF
I'm like, no, no, I didn't mean right.
It's really confusing.
NOTE CONF
And she gets very annoyed with me anyway.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What about this one?
We've got some stuff going on here in a bracket.
NOTE CONF
Haven't actually got any brackets like I just told you.
You really should.
NOTE CONF
Um.
What's going to happen here?
NOTE CONF
Okay, I've got 70.
I've got loads of responses.
NOTE CONF
Let's see what people are saying.
Most people are saying character.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's right.
NOTE CONF
Everything going on here is completely.
This is all integer stuff and integers we can translate
NOTE CONF
into characters.
So we're going to cast this to a character because
NOTE CONF
it knows how to do that.
Um okay.
NOTE CONF
So now here we've got a character.
We've got this is a more complicated thing going on
NOTE CONF
in here with some integers.
We've got a character.
NOTE CONF
We're dividing all this by all this thing, and then
we're doing a bit of multiplication.
NOTE CONF
So where is that going to leave us at the
end?
NOTE CONF
What kind of type is that going to lead to.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Most people are saying double.
That is correct.
NOTE CONF
All of this is integer integer operations.
Then we convert x to an integer and this becomes
NOTE CONF
integer division.
Then we're multiplying it by a double.
NOTE CONF
So that means that this final operation up around here
is going to be interpreted as a double opera, as
NOTE CONF
an operation for doubles.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's just see this quickly.
This is going to be an integer right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Because this is all integer stuff.
NOTE CONF
Then we're then we're casting it to a double and
then we're recasting the double to an integer.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to end up with an integer okay.
Oh yes that's fine I'm going to leave this up.
NOTE CONF
So this is for questions.
You can start putting questions in.
NOTE CONF
But what I'm going to do now is I'm going
to go on to the next thing, which is loops.
NOTE CONF
Actually, sorry.
Let me just look at this.
NOTE CONF
So is there anything I want to say about this?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So to go back to the very introductory stuff, um,
Java is imperative is a list of statements essentially that
NOTE CONF
goes step by steps and it's based on objects.
Objects carry state and they have behaviour.
NOTE CONF
And a lot of what we're going to do on
this course is try and get your head around what
NOTE CONF
that means to be object oriented.
Actually, in the first weeks, what we're doing is mostly
NOTE CONF
the basic structural stuff and not too much about objects.
And then we get onto the object orientation stuff later
NOTE CONF
on.
Some people find object orientation quite hard to get their
NOTE CONF
head around initially, but after a while you'll get very
used to it.
NOTE CONF
You have to have this main, main method in your
class.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I think everything else we've just been doing.
So you can look over that summary if you want,
NOTE CONF
but I think that's all covered.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now what we're going to look or look at
is conditionals and loops.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is very, very basic structures.
NOTE CONF
If you've done any coding, you've done much coding before.
This will be very, very familiar to you if you
NOTE CONF
haven't.
This is really important stuff to get your head around.
NOTE CONF
And nothing is happening in Java.
That's particularly different to happening in other languages.
NOTE CONF
The same kind of general ideas apply.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the control flow.
So we've already said it's imperative.
NOTE CONF
That means you do one statement and then another and
then another.
NOTE CONF
All in steps okay.
But sometimes these these steps that you do are not
NOTE CONF
just simply do this and then move on.
They're more uh, there's more stuff going on, which is
NOTE CONF
what happens with conditionals and loops.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this allows us to choreograph control flow so you
can go around do things more than once.
NOTE CONF
You can do things under certain conditions and do different
things under other conditions and so forth.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So let's go.
NOTE CONF
Let's do an if statement.
Where are my notes for this.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Let's get rid of all of this.
NOTE CONF
We don't need this anymore.
So we're just going to start off by saying very
NOTE CONF
simple.
If an if statement starts off with a condition that
NOTE CONF
you're checking.
So if X is less than y.
NOTE CONF
Then we open the curly braces and we say what
we want to do.
NOTE CONF
If x is less than y, we're just going to
print out that this is the case.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to say y is bigger than x
okay.
NOTE CONF
Oh I forgot my plus here.
I've got to tell a way to join this number
NOTE CONF
to this string.
So I've got to have my plus there.
NOTE CONF
And it's not very happy because I'm using x and
Y and I haven't declared them.
NOTE CONF
So I'm going to say x and y are integers
okay.
NOTE CONF
This is getting a little bit out of sync because
of I've chopping about okay.
NOTE CONF
Now let's see what happens.
Oh what's the problem here.
NOTE CONF
Oh the problem here is I'm trying to get it
to say whether two integers are bigger or not, but
NOTE CONF
I haven't told them what value those integers have.
So let's put some values in here actually.
NOTE CONF
So instead of doing that I'll do x.
What is it x equal Then ten.
NOTE CONF
Cool.
And why is 27 cool?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so now I'm getting a yellow thing here.
And the yellow thing, what is the yellow thing saying?
NOTE CONF
It says condition X less than y is always true,
right?
NOTE CONF
So I've given it fixed values for x and y.
And then I put in some code to see which
NOTE CONF
one is bigger.
Right.
NOTE CONF
I don't need to do that.
I can see which one is bigger.
NOTE CONF
This is fixed.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So normally when you're doing this you wouldn't be fixing
these values before you're checking.
NOTE CONF
These would be changing in different places or you'd be
passing them in right now I'm just going to fix
NOTE CONF
them in here because I'm just showing the for the
loop.
NOTE CONF
So let's run that.
So if it's got yellow objections it means it is
NOTE CONF
going to run it.
But it doesn't think it's that well written.
NOTE CONF
If it's got red objections it's not going to run
okay 27 is bigger than ten.
NOTE CONF
Awesome okay.
What happens if x is bigger X is now 30.
NOTE CONF
What happens is nothing, right.
Because I've just said if this is true then print
NOTE CONF
something out.
That's it.
NOTE CONF
If it's not true, I haven't said what to do.
There's nothing for it to do if this isn't true.
NOTE CONF
So often that's what we want to do.
Only do something under one condition.
NOTE CONF
And if that condition is not true, do nothing.
But quite often we want to say if something is
NOTE CONF
true, do a.
And if it's not true, do be right.
NOTE CONF
So what are we going to do?
If it is not true, then we're going to say
NOTE CONF
else we're going to print this out the other way
around.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to have X is bigger than Y.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now if we run that.
It's going to print out 30 is bigger than 27.
NOTE CONF
So whichever way around we're going to get the print.
We're going to get it to print out something.
NOTE CONF
That's true.
We haven't actually looked at the case where they're both
NOTE CONF
the same, but we won't be worrying about that right
now.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So that is a bit oh my goodness.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, by the way, people, I do tend to get
a lot of like crazy nonsense in the questions.
NOTE CONF
I don't really mind people putting nonsense, particularly in the
word cloud.
NOTE CONF
If you want to put nonsense, whatever.
If you if you spam the QA thing with nonsense.
NOTE CONF
I can't actually see any actual questions in there, so
I would recommend not doing that too much.
NOTE CONF
That's kind of annoying for people who want actual answers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is all just stating what's true.
As usual, I will do this in live coding.
NOTE CONF
I think that's more useful, but the slides are there
for you to look through if you want.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, and this is all exactly what we've done before.
NOTE CONF
So looking at some examples of this.
Uh, if x is less than y, return x.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise return minus x.
This is an if statement you might want to put
NOTE CONF
in.
If you always want a positive number and you don't
NOTE CONF
know whether you're going to have it positive or negative.
What this one is doing.
NOTE CONF
Again, this would be really familiar if you've done some
coding because this is a traditional thing to do.
NOTE CONF
You're swapping the values around.
Have a look at that to see in detail if
NOTE CONF
you're not clear on how that's working.
Um, so these are just little examples.
NOTE CONF
It might be worth having a look through on your
own to figure out how you how you can do
NOTE CONF
it.
Maybe just try it out in Java.
NOTE CONF
Um, this this this is basic error checking.
So this isn't probably usually the way you'd want to
NOTE CONF
do error checking.
We'll we'll do error checking in a later lecture.
NOTE CONF
But it is sometimes quite useful to do this.
So say for example you're doing division.
NOTE CONF
And you know that you don't know what's going to
come in, but you know that it might be zero.
NOTE CONF
Uh, what you can do, you can check whether it
is zero.
NOTE CONF
And then if it is, you don't try and do
the division.
NOTE CONF
You just do something else.
Maybe just print out an error message or something.
NOTE CONF
And if it because you don't want the whole program
to break, you want you want to pick up that
NOTE CONF
up sensibly.
So.
NOTE CONF
So an if statement is one way that you might
want to do that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So loops loops uh things keep on happening again and
NOTE CONF
again and again until a certain thing happens.
So let's program a while loop.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we'll get rid of this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So while so in while loops and for for loops
NOTE CONF
which we'll get into in a minute.
You generally you have an iterator and that the point
NOTE CONF
of an iterator is it's counting how many times you've
been through the loop, right?
NOTE CONF
And the iterator is usually just called.
I, um, and with a while loop.
NOTE CONF
There's lots of ways you can do this.
We're very common to say, well, whilst the iterator is
NOTE CONF
less than a certain number, i.e. once a number of,
as long as the number of times you've been through
NOTE CONF
a loop is less than the total number of times
you want to go through the loop, you keep going.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to say whilst AI is less than
or equal to n, so n is some number we
NOTE CONF
will give it.
Then we do some stuff.
NOTE CONF
Now of course, as always we have to initially initially
initialise this.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to say I is an integer.
And you would normally want to start the iterator at
NOTE CONF
zero.
How many times have you already been through the loop
NOTE CONF
zero.
So that's standard.
NOTE CONF
Although in some circumstances you might want to do something
different.
NOTE CONF
And how many times do you want to go through
the loop?
NOTE CONF
This can be anything you like.
How many times do we want to go through our
NOTE CONF
loop?
Ten times.
NOTE CONF
Fine.
So we're going to go through we're going to keep
NOTE CONF
going through until we've gone through ten times okay.
So what we're going to do is we're going to
NOTE CONF
do some, uh, we're going to do multiples.
We're going to print out all the powers of two.
NOTE CONF
That's what we're going to do this time.
So we need to be carrying data over between loops.
NOTE CONF
So we need to have something that is contained as
carrying the value of where we are so far.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to call this val val is an
integer.
NOTE CONF
And what's it going to start at.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What would be a good starting value for this.
Yeah one.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So sometimes you want that to be zero.
NOTE CONF
But we're doing powers of two.
Obviously if we're multiplying something that's starting a zero by
NOTE CONF
two we're never going to get anywhere.
So because it's multiplication we want it to start at
NOTE CONF
one.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to print out.
Um we're going to print out how many times we've
NOTE CONF
gone through the loop and the current value.
And I'm going to put a string in there with
NOTE CONF
just a space so that these aren't smushed together.
It'll be much easier to read.
NOTE CONF
This is where we are so far.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's what we're doing in the loop, right?
So if we just run that, what's it going to
NOTE CONF
do?
right?
NOTE CONF
It's just going to keep going forever and it's going
to print out I0 and value is one.
NOTE CONF
These are just initial initial values because we're not actually
doing anything.
NOTE CONF
So of course we have to do the the sums.
So we need a new value.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to say value equals value times two.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So again if you're used to coding reading the statement
is probably quite clear.
NOTE CONF
If you're not used to this way of doing things
that might look kind of weird right.
NOTE CONF
Because this is in maths we're used to this used
to this being an equal sign.
NOTE CONF
And what this is saying is something is equal to
twice itself, which makes no sense okay.
NOTE CONF
But that is not what it's doing in Java or
commonly in coding languages.
NOTE CONF
What this is doing is assigning values.
So as we saw before with the instant division, you
NOTE CONF
first of all evaluate the right hand side.
So what this is doing is saying right.
NOTE CONF
First of all evaluate this.
What is val.
NOTE CONF
Val is whatever we've got to so far.
So on the first round time round it's just going
NOTE CONF
to be one okay.
We're going to get this value from from wherever from
NOTE CONF
where it's stored the current value.
We're going to multiply it by two.
NOTE CONF
So in the first loop that's going to give us
a value of two.
NOTE CONF
And then we're going to give that value to whatever's
on the left hand side.
NOTE CONF
So the fact that these are the same it doesn't
matter.
NOTE CONF
They look the same, but they're actually not quite the
same because this is in the first time round.
NOTE CONF
And this is after we've done the operation.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This will become really, really familiar to you.
It's a bit non-intuitive to begin with.
NOTE CONF
So there we're changing the value.
And now we have to let it know we have
NOTE CONF
to change the iterator because we're going through the loop.
We've been through the loop in extra time.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to say the iterator is now I
equals I plus one right.
NOTE CONF
Just add one to wherever we are.
And now let's run that.
NOTE CONF
And this is doing exactly what we want.
Here are this is how many times we've been around.
NOTE CONF
And here are all the powers of two.
Awesome.
NOTE CONF
And actually, because iteration is so common, there's a shortcut
you don't have to put I equals I plus one.
NOTE CONF
You can just put I plus plus it means exactly
the same.
NOTE CONF
And that will do exactly the same thing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now what would happen.
So we've got these curly brackets here.
NOTE CONF
Right.
What happens if we take this out.
NOTE CONF
Let's run that and see.
Have a think what you think might happen.
NOTE CONF
Let's see.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what is going to happen is what happened before
NOTE CONF
we put any of this other code in?
It's just printing.
NOTE CONF
It's doing the first line.
And the reason for that is that in Java, if
NOTE CONF
you don't have the curly braces, it just assumes that
the first line is the loop.
NOTE CONF
Everything else is outside the loop.
So it's interpreting this as if it's like this.
NOTE CONF
Now if you're used to something like Python, you might
be used to languages where indentation is actually meaningful.
NOTE CONF
And the language will say, well, look, this is all
indented.
NOTE CONF
So this is clearly all part of the loop.
That spacing is important.
NOTE CONF
It's not in Java.
It doesn't care about the indentation at all.
NOTE CONF
The indentation is not there for the interpretation by the
machine.
NOTE CONF
The indentation is there to make it human readable, so
it's easy for us to see what the loop is.
NOTE CONF
But Java does not care about that.
So you have to put in these curly braces.
NOTE CONF
And that's again this is the same sort of thing.
It's Java's much more much stricter than other languages, which
NOTE CONF
is kind of annoying but also potentially quite useful.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we'll quickly go on to four and then we're
going to stop for some questions.
NOTE CONF
There's a couple more things I want to do about
loops, but we can fit those in on the Monday
NOTE CONF
lecture.
But before loop let's look at the structure of a
NOTE CONF
for loop.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So a for loop is a little bit different.
Now a for loop has a more complicated header but
NOTE CONF
makes things a bit simpler in other ways.
So first of all we initialise we we initialise the
NOTE CONF
iterator within the loop right.
So we start off with this into I equals zero.
NOTE CONF
That means we don't have to do it here.
Then we say what we would have in the while
NOTE CONF
loop.
How long are we doing it for I less than
NOTE CONF
or equal to n.
And then the third thing is how are we going
NOTE CONF
to change it on each loop.
Right.
NOTE CONF
I++.
And then obviously we don't also want to do that
NOTE CONF
within the loop.
So.
NOTE CONF
And if we run that we should see that's giving
us exactly the same.
NOTE CONF
So essentially the difference between a for loop and a
while loop is that the for loop is tidying these
NOTE CONF
things up a little bit.
It's putting it all in the header.
NOTE CONF
And it's clearer and more difficult to make mistakes.
So if you can use a for loop and don't
NOTE CONF
use a while loop.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Does anybody know when you might not be able to
do that.
NOTE CONF
And you might need to use a while loop.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Mhm.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
When it's indefinite.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So here I know how many times I need to
go around.
NOTE CONF
Right.
I need to go around n times I can do
NOTE CONF
this n times so I can put this in here.
That's fine.
NOTE CONF
Um and so in the previous while loop, we didn't
need that to be a while.
NOTE CONF
It could be a for loop, but sometimes we don't
actually don't know how many times we're going to go
NOTE CONF
around.
Could we put the umbrella up when it starts raining?
NOTE CONF
I don't know when that's going to happen.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Or something can happen, you know, as soon as 20
people.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
As soon as soon as something happens, there's Is unpredictable.
NOTE CONF
Then you do something.
Then you can't use a for loop.
NOTE CONF
You use a while loop.
But if you know how many times you're going to
NOTE CONF
go round.
Use a for loop.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's the main things I want to cover
I will.
NOTE CONF
There's, as I said, a couple of examples of that
that we'll do on on on Monday.
NOTE CONF
But let me just see if I can get anything
useful out of this.
NOTE CONF
I don't think there.
Are there any useful questions?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If you have a useful question, put your hand up.
NOTE CONF
I will go through all of the questions and see
if there are sensible things and email people.
NOTE CONF
Squid game.
Oh my god, who's watching Squid Game?
NOTE CONF
I've just I watched the first episode and then I
was like, oh God, I don't I don't know if
NOTE CONF
I've got the strength to watch this.
I'm now on the second one.
NOTE CONF
It's so good.
But it's it's so bleak.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Why do we learn Java and not machine codes?
NOTE CONF
I mean, machine code is really, really difficult because it's
completely unintuitive.
NOTE CONF
You don't need to know machine code anymore.
So go and learn machine code if you want to.
NOTE CONF
Absolutely.
Fine.
NOTE CONF
But it's not necessary.
And it's really difficult.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
All right.
NOTE CONF
I think it's easier if I just, um.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Where can we find the PowerPoint slides?
So this is actually a useful question.
NOTE CONF
So the PowerPoint slides where I go through the where
all the content is.
NOTE CONF
Those are on open course.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So have I got open course up.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Here we go.
Open course.
NOTE CONF
So if you go to schedule.
So this is the the schedule is the overview telling
NOTE CONF
you what's going on each week.
If you then when you click on schedule you'll then
NOTE CONF
see all these detailed weeks popping up.
So if you click on that this was going to
NOTE CONF
give you the link to the lectures.
These will give you the lecture slides.
NOTE CONF
Um, and also the information you need for tutorials which
you haven't got yet.
NOTE CONF
But that's where you get those lecture slides from.
I don't put the woo clap slides up because it's
NOTE CONF
usually just um, the questions.
Pictures of people's pets.
NOTE CONF
Maybe people would like those somewhere they can access them.
If you have any ideas about the organisation, let me
NOTE CONF
know.
But in the meantime, that's the end for today.
NOTE CONF
Thank you so much.
Please go to lab sessions if you need help.
NOTE CONF
There's been loads of questions on Piazza.
Oh, thanks.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
So there's lots of questions about on Piazza, about set
NOTE CONF
up.
If you're getting the answers you need from there.
NOTE CONF
Perfect.
But if that's if it's easier to just go to
NOTE CONF
lab sessions, get someone to help you.
See you on Monday.
NOTE CONF